README.adoc, before:

= XBELmark
:nofooter:

XBELmark is a program suite written in {cpp}, Java, and C# for facilitating the
use and exchange of Internet bookmarks as
https://pyxml.sourceforge.net/topics/xbel/[XBEL].

XBELmark has an XSL stylesheet for dynamically transforming XBEL into XHTML5
with collapsible sections using the XSLT 1.0 processor of a web browser. With
the provided XSLT extension, XBELmark can also produce XHTML5 that is
compatible with the HTML used by Firefox for importing bookmarks with the
timestamps preserved.

XBELmark has a Qt version that is mainly targeted at Windows 11 users (but can
also be used by Linux users) for pasting a URL from the clipboard as an
Internet shortcut in a bookmark file format. Supported bookmark file formats
are XBEL (with the `.xbel` extension) and URL (with the `.url` extension).
Within Windows File Explorer, a new bookmark file is automatically highlighted
when pasted using the context menu. Favicon is not supported.

== Building

Regardless of the version of XBELmark being built, `${BASEDIR}` refers to the
root of the project (e.g., `${BASEDIR}/qt` contains the Qt version).

=== Qt Version

This is the recommended version of XBELmark for Windows 11 users but can also
be used in Linux. libxml2, libxslt, and Qt 6 are required.

==== Windows 11

MinGW-w64 under MSYS2 with the UCRT64 environment is used in building the Qt
version. To set up MSYS2, follow the
https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/cpp/config-mingw[instructions] provided by
Visual Studio Code. In addition to the provided instructions, add the `MSYSTEM`
environment variable with `UCRT64` as its value. To be able to start MSYS2 from
the Windows command prompt, add `C:\msys64\bin` to the `PATH` environment
variable after `C:\msys64\ucrt64\bin` (such that the former has a lower search
priority than the latter). This allows MSYS2 to be started by typing `bash -l`
on the Windows command prompt.

After MSYS2 and the gcc toolchain are installed, install the following
dependencies using `pacman -S` under MSYS2 (not the Windows command prompt):

* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-cmake`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-libxml2`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-libxslt`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-ninja`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-qt6-base`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-ruby`

MSYS2 has a quirk in that the directory containing the libxml2 headers needs to
be exported in the `CPATH` environment variable in order for the project build
to find them:

----
export CPATH=C:/msys64/ucrt64/include/libxml2\;${CPATH}
----

From `${BASEDIR}/qt`, the Qt version can be built by

----
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX="/c/Program Files/xbelmark" ..
ninja install
----

To install the built project, see xref:win11-install[].

==== Linux

The dependencies are assumed to be at standard locations findable by CMake. If
not, their header and library directories can be exported in the `CPATH` and
`LIBRARY_PATH` environment variables, respectively, for the project build to
find.

From `${BASEDIR}/qt`, the Qt version can be built by

----
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=${HOME}/.local/opt/xbelmark ..
make install
----

=== Java Version

This is the recommended version of XBELmark for Linux users and has all the
features of the Qt version except the automatic highlighting of a new bookmark
file within Windows File Explorer. Assuming Apache Maven is installed, the Java
version can be built from `${BASEDIR}/java` by

----
mvn package
----

The resulting JAR files are in `${BASEDIR}/java/target`. Copy
`${BASEDIR}/java/target/xbelmark-0.1.0-jar-with-dependencies.jar` to the `bin`
directory of the installation path (with possible renaming of the JAR file),
and copy everything under the `${BASEDIR}/local` directory of the project to
the root of the installation path.

If the Java version is to be used for adding an XBELmark shortcut to the
Windows context menu, `javaw.exe` should be used instead of `java.exe` to avoid
the Windows command prompt from appearing every time a URL is being pasted. The
`javaw.exe` executable is located at `C:\Program Files\Common
Files\Oracle\Java\javapath`.

To install the built project for Windows 11, see xref:win11-install[], and
adjust the commands accordingly.

=== .NET Version

This version of XBELmark has all the features of the Qt version except the
automatic highlighting of a new bookmark file within Windows File Explorer. The
executables built for Windows and Linux differ slightly from each other. When
the project is built for Windows, the executable displays any error message as
a message box, and the bookmark must be written as a file and cannot be printed
to the standard output on the command prompt. When the project is built for
Linux, the executable prints any error message to the standard error, and the
bookmark URL must be given on the command line and not from the clipboard.
Assuming .NET 8 SDK is installed, the .NET version can be built from
`${BASEDIR}/dotnet` by

----
dotnet publish
----

Despite the command, the resulting DLL binary (`xbelmark.dll`) is
platform-specific because of conditional compilation. Copy everything under
`${BASEDIR}/dotnet/bin/Release/net8.0/publish` to the `bin` directory of the
installation path, and copy everything under the `${BASEDIR}/local` directory
of the project to the root of the installation path.

To install the built project for Windows 11, see xref:win11-install[], and
adjust the commands accordingly.

[#win11-install]
== Windows 11 Installation

=== Context Menu

To add an XBELmark {cpp} shortcut to the Windows context menu, open the
registry editor, and create a key under
`HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\Directory\Background\shell` using an appropriate name for
the key (such as `Paste as bookmark`). Create another key named `Command` under
the key that was just created. Set the `(Default)` value of the `Command` key
to

----
"C:\Program Files\xbelmark\bin\xbelmarkw.exe" paste --format [format] --spaces
----

where `[format]` can be `URL` or `XBEL` (case sensitive) for their respective
file formats. This shortcut allows a URL from the clipboard to be pasted as a
bookmark file using the context menu. The `--spaces` option preserves the
spaces in the file name of a bookmark, which is usually desired for Windows
users.

If this does not immediately take effect, try restarting Windows.

=== Opening XBEL with Ruby

The URL file type should already be associated with the default web browser.
However, the XBEL file type is most likely not. For opening an XBEL file with a
web browser, the `.xbel` file extension needs to be associated with a file
type, which in turn needs to be associated with a command that executes a Ruby
script. Open the Windows command prompt (not MSYS2) as an administrator, and
type the following commands:

----
cmd /c assoc .xbel=XBEL
cmd /c ftype XBEL=C:\msys64\ucrt64\bin\rubyw.exe ^
  "C:\Program Files\xbelmark\bin\open-xbel.rb" ^
  '"C:\Program Files\Mozilla Firefox\firefox.exe"' "%1"
----

where Firefox is assumed and should be changed to the desired browser. `XBEL`
is the file type used in the commands, but it is arbitrary and can be any name.
However, `.xbel` is the file extension used by XBELmark and cannot be changed.

If this does not immediately take effect, try restarting Windows.

== Command-Line and Web Usage

This section documents the usage of XBELmark from the command line and from a
web browser.

=== Command Line

Commands begin with `xbelmark` are applicable to any version of XBELmark being
used unless indicated otherwise. For the Java version, the `xbelmark` command
would be replaced by `java -jar` followed by the path to the JAR file (with the
dependencies packaged) and then the arguments.

For the Qt version in Windows, the executable `xbelmarkw` (which is not built
for Linux) is for the context menu so that the Windows command prompt does not
appear when a URL is being pasted. This makes `xbelmarkw` unusable from the
command line. To use XBELmark from the command line, the executable `xbelmark`
is built for both Windows and Linux, but the `paste` subcommand still requires
Qt, which makes such a subcommand unusable on a remote machine for example. In
such a scenario, the Java version should be used.

For help on the available subcommands of XBELmark,

----
xbelmark --help
----

For help on the options accepted by a subcommand,

----
xbelmark [subcommand] --help
----

Assuming the directory that contains the `xbelmark` executable is in the `PATH`
environment variable, an XBEL file can be transformed into XHTML5 on Windows
MSYS2 with the following command (Qt and .NET versions):

----
xbelmark xslt \
  --xsl "/c/Program Files/xbelmark/share/xbelmark/stylesheet/firefox/xhtml5.xsl" \
  --in bookmarks.xbel
----

Similarly, to transform an XBEL file into XHTML5 in Linux (Qt and .NET
versions),

----
xbelmark xslt \
  --xsl ${HOME}/.local/opt/xbelmark/share/xbelmark/stylesheet/firefox/xhtml5.xsl \
  --in bookmarks.xbel
----

For the Java version, the JAR file with the dependencies packaged contains the
XSLT processor from Apache Xalan. To transform an XBEL file into XHTML5, the
`xslt` subcommand is still required, but its
https://xalan.apache.org/xalan-j/commandline.html[arguments] are passed
unmodified to Apache Xalan (note the single hyphens):

----
java -jar ${BASEDIR}/java/target/xbelmark-0.1.0-jar-with-dependencies.jar xslt \
  -XSL ${BASEDIR}/local/share/xbelmark/stylesheet/firefox/xhtml5.xsl \
  -IN bookmarks.xbel
----

XSL parameters are passed differently between the Qt/.NET version and the Java
version. For the Qt version, parameters are passed as `--param [name]=[value]`.
For the Java version, parameters are passed as `-PARAM [name] [value]`. For
both versions, the parameter value is not quoted. The available XSL parameters
with their default values in brackets are

* `bookmarks.title` [`'Bookmarks'`]
* `bookmarks.menu.name` [`'Bookmarks Menu'`]
* `folder.title` [`'[Folder Name]'`]
* `folded.default` [`'yes'`]

The `paste` subcommand has the same syntax for its arguments across all
versions of XBELmark. To paste a URL from the clipboard as a bookmark file in
the XBEL format in the current directory,

----
xbelmark paste
----

XBEL is the default format when no format is specified. To print a bookmark of
a given URL in the URL format to the standard output,

----
xbelmark paste --format URL --uri "https://example.com/" --stdout
----

Note that the .NET version for Windows does not support the printing of a
bookmark to the standard output.

=== Web Browser

To dynamically transform an XBEL file served by an HTTP server into XHTML5 by a
web browser, add the following processing instruction above the `xbel` element
of the XBEL document:

----
<?xml-stylesheet type="text/xsl" href="/share/xbelmark/stylesheet/firefox/xhtml5.xsl"?>
----

where the URL to the XSL stylesheet should be appropriately adjusted. When an
XBEL file is served by an HTTP server, the web browser applies the XSL
stylesheet to it and displays its XHTML5 transform as a web page with
collapsible sections and clickable links. JavaScript is part of the XHTML5
transform and must be enabled. An XBEL file may need to have the `.xml`
extension for the web browser to apply the XSL stylesheet.

Commit message:

Add checks for an existing file with the same name in the Java and .NET versions.

README.adoc, after:

= XBELmark
:nofooter:

XBELmark is a program suite written in {cpp}, Java, and C# for facilitating the
use and exchange of Internet bookmarks as
https://pyxml.sourceforge.net/topics/xbel/[XBEL].

XBELmark has an XSL stylesheet for dynamically transforming XBEL into XHTML5
with collapsible sections using the XSLT 1.0 processor of a web browser. With
the provided XSLT extension, XBELmark can also produce XHTML5 that is
compatible with the HTML used by Firefox for importing bookmarks with the
timestamps preserved.

XBELmark has a Qt version that is mainly targeted at Windows 11 users (but can
also be used by Linux users) for pasting a URL from the clipboard as an
Internet shortcut in a bookmark file format. Supported bookmark file formats
are XBEL (with the `.xbel` extension) and URL (with the `.url` extension).
Within Windows File Explorer, a new bookmark file is automatically highlighted
when pasted using the context menu. Favicon is not supported.

== Building

Regardless of the version of XBELmark being built, `${BASEDIR}` refers to the
root of the project (e.g., `${BASEDIR}/qt` contains the Qt version).

=== Qt Version

This is the recommended version of XBELmark for Windows 11 users but can also
be used in Linux. libxml2, libxslt, and Qt 6 are required.

==== Windows 11

MinGW-w64 under MSYS2 with the UCRT64 environment is used in building the Qt
version. To set up MSYS2, follow the
https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/cpp/config-mingw[instructions] provided by
Visual Studio Code. In addition to the provided instructions, add the `MSYSTEM`
environment variable with `UCRT64` as its value. To be able to start MSYS2 from
the Windows command prompt, add `C:\msys64\bin` to the `PATH` environment
variable after `C:\msys64\ucrt64\bin` (such that the former has a lower search
priority than the latter). This allows MSYS2 to be started by typing `bash -l`
on the Windows command prompt.

After MSYS2 and the gcc toolchain are installed, install the following
dependencies using `pacman -S` under MSYS2 (not the Windows command prompt):

* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-cmake`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-libxml2`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-libxslt`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-ninja`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-qt6-base`
* `mingw-w64-ucrt-x86_64-ruby`

MSYS2 has a quirk in that the directory containing the libxml2 headers needs to
be exported in the `CPATH` environment variable in order for the project build
to find them:

----
export CPATH=C:/msys64/ucrt64/include/libxml2\;${CPATH}
----

From `${BASEDIR}/qt`, the Qt version can be built by

----
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX="/c/Program Files/xbelmark" ..
ninja install
----

To install the built project, see xref:win11-install[].

==== Linux

The dependencies are assumed to be at standard locations findable by CMake. If
not, their header and library directories can be exported in the `CPATH` and
`LIBRARY_PATH` environment variables, respectively, for the project build to
find.

From `${BASEDIR}/qt`, the Qt version can be built by

----
mkdir build
cd build
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=${HOME}/.local/opt/xbelmark ..
make install
----

=== Java Version

This is the recommended version of XBELmark for Linux users and has all the
features of the Qt version except the automatic highlighting of a new bookmark
file within Windows File Explorer. Assuming Apache Maven is installed, the Java
version can be built from `${BASEDIR}/java` by

----
mvn package
----

The resulting JAR files are in `${BASEDIR}/java/target`. Copy
`${BASEDIR}/java/target/xbelmark-0.1.0-jar-with-dependencies.jar` to the `bin`
directory of the installation path (with possible renaming of the JAR file),
and copy everything under the `${BASEDIR}/local` directory of the project to
the root of the installation path.

If the Java version is to be used for adding an XBELmark shortcut to the
Windows context menu, `javaw.exe` should be used instead of `java.exe` to avoid
the Windows command prompt from appearing every time a URL is being pasted. The
`javaw.exe` executable is located at `C:\Program Files\Common
Files\Oracle\Java\javapath`.

To install the built project for Windows 11, see xref:win11-install[], and
adjust the commands accordingly.

=== .NET Version

This version of XBELmark has all the features of the Qt version except the
automatic highlighting of a new bookmark file within Windows File Explorer. The
executables built for Windows and Linux differ slightly from each other. When
the project is built for Windows, the executable displays any error message as
a message box, and the bookmark must be written as a file and cannot be printed
to the standard output on the command prompt. When the project is built for
Linux, the executable prints any error message to the standard error, and the
bookmark URL must be given on the command line and not from the clipboard.
Assuming .NET 8 SDK is installed, the .NET version can be built from
`${BASEDIR}/dotnet` by

----
dotnet publish
----

Despite the command, the resulting DLL binary (`xbelmark.dll`) is
platform-specific because of conditional compilation. Copy everything under
`${BASEDIR}/dotnet/bin/Release/net8.0/publish` to the `bin` directory of the
installation path, and copy everything under the `${BASEDIR}/local` directory
of the project to the root of the installation path.

To install the built project for Windows 11, see xref:win11-install[], and
adjust the commands accordingly.

[#win11-install]
== Windows 11 Installation

=== Context Menu

To add an XBELmark {cpp} shortcut to the Windows context menu, open the
registry editor, and create a key under
`HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\Directory\Background\shell` using an appropriate name for
the key (such as `Paste as bookmark`). Create another key named `Command` under
the key that was just created. Set the `(Default)` value of the `Command` key
to

----
"C:\Program Files\xbelmark\bin\xbelmarkw.exe" paste --format [format] --spaces
----

where `[format]` can be `URL` or `XBEL` (case sensitive) for their respective
file formats. This shortcut allows a URL from the clipboard to be pasted as a
bookmark file using the context menu. The `--spaces` option preserves the
spaces in the file name of a bookmark, which is usually desired for Windows
users.

If this does not immediately take effect, try restarting Windows.

=== Opening XBEL with Ruby

The URL file type should already be associated with the default web browser.
However, the XBEL file type is most likely not. For opening an XBEL file with a
web browser, the `.xbel` file extension needs to be associated with a file
type, which in turn needs to be associated with a command that executes a Ruby
script. Open the Windows command prompt (not MSYS2) as an administrator, and
type the following commands:

----
cmd /c assoc .xbel=XBEL
cmd /c ftype XBEL=C:\msys64\ucrt64\bin\rubyw.exe ^
  "C:\Program Files\xbelmark\bin\open-xbel.rb" ^
  '"C:\Program Files\Mozilla Firefox\firefox.exe"' "%1"
----

where Firefox is assumed and should be changed to the desired browser. `XBEL`
is the file type used in the commands, but it is arbitrary and can be any name.
However, `.xbel` is the file extension used by XBELmark and cannot be changed.

If this does not immediately take effect, try restarting Windows.

== Command-Line and Web Usage

This section documents the usage of XBELmark from the command line and from a
web browser.

=== Command Line

Commands begin with `xbelmark` are applicable to any version of XBELmark being
used unless indicated otherwise. For the Java version, the `xbelmark` command
would be replaced by `java -jar` followed by the path to the JAR file (with the
dependencies packaged) and then the arguments.

For the Qt version in Windows, the executable `xbelmarkw` (which is not built
for Linux) is for the context menu so that the Windows command prompt does not
appear when a URL is being pasted. This makes `xbelmarkw` unusable from the
command line. To use XBELmark from the command line, the executable `xbelmark`
is built for both Windows and Linux, but the `paste` subcommand still requires
Qt, which makes such a subcommand unusable on a remote machine for example. In
such a scenario, the Java version should be used.

For help on the available subcommands of XBELmark,

----
xbelmark --help
----

For help on the options accepted by a subcommand,

----
xbelmark [subcommand] --help
----

Assuming the directory that contains the `xbelmark` executable is in the `PATH`
environment variable, an XBEL file can be transformed into XHTML5 on Windows
MSYS2 with the following command (Qt and .NET versions):

----
xbelmark xslt \
  --xsl "/c/Program Files/xbelmark/share/xbelmark/stylesheet/firefox/xhtml5.xsl" \
  --in bookmarks.xbel
----

Similarly, to transform an XBEL file into XHTML5 in Linux (Qt and .NET
versions),

----
xbelmark xslt \
  --xsl ${HOME}/.local/opt/xbelmark/share/xbelmark/stylesheet/firefox/xhtml5.xsl \
  --in bookmarks.xbel
----

For the Java version, the JAR file with the dependencies packaged contains the
XSLT processor from Apache Xalan. To transform an XBEL file into XHTML5, the
`xslt` subcommand is still required, but its
https://xalan.apache.org/xalan-j/commandline.html[arguments] are passed
unmodified to Apache Xalan (note the single hyphens):

----
java -jar ${BASEDIR}/java/target/xbelmark-0.1.0-jar-with-dependencies.jar xslt \
  -XSL ${BASEDIR}/local/share/xbelmark/stylesheet/firefox/xhtml5.xsl \
  -IN bookmarks.xbel
----

XSL parameters are passed the same among all versions as `--param [name]
[value]` without the parameter value being quoted. The available XSL parameters
with their default values in brackets are

* `bookmarks.title` [`'Bookmarks'`]
* `bookmarks.menu.name` [`'Bookmarks Menu'`]
* `folder.title` [`'[Folder Name]'`]
* `folded.default` [`'yes'`]

The `paste` subcommand has the same syntax for its arguments across all
versions of XBELmark. To paste a URL from the clipboard as a bookmark file in
the XBEL format in the current directory,

----
xbelmark paste
----

XBEL is the default format when no format is specified. To print a bookmark of
a given URL in the URL format to the standard output,

----
xbelmark paste --format URL --uri "https://example.com/" --stdout
----

Note that the .NET version for Windows does not support the printing of a
bookmark to the standard output.

=== Web Browser

To dynamically transform an XBEL file served by an HTTP server into XHTML5 by a
web browser, add the following processing instruction above the `xbel` element
of the XBEL document:

----
<?xml-stylesheet type="text/xsl" href="/share/xbelmark/stylesheet/firefox/xhtml5.xsl"?>
----

where the URL to the XSL stylesheet should be appropriately adjusted. When an
XBEL file is served by an HTTP server, the web browser applies the XSL
stylesheet to it and displays its XHTML5 transform as a web page with
collapsible sections and clickable links. JavaScript is part of the XHTML5
transform and must be enabled. An XBEL file may need to have the `.xml`
extension for the web browser to apply the XSL stylesheet.
